# Node.js

Node.js, oft called just "Node", is the first successful application for **deploying JS outside a browser** (thus allowing JS to be used in all levels of the tech stack).

Node.js **runs off of V8**, which is the JS interpreter/execution engine developed by Google (employed in all Chromium values).

Node.js was created by Ryan Dahl, and is currently maintained by the [Open.js foundation](https://openjsf.org/).

## Usage

After installing, you can use Node.js **within your terminal w/ the `node` command**.

## Installing packages w/ NPM

Using packages in your code takes two steps:

1. Install package to your machine via **Node Package Manager** (NPM).
2. Include a **`require` statement** in your code that references the package.

(NPM is automatically installed when you install Node.js.)

There's actually a secret step 0. Before using NPM, you must **initialize your code to use NPM** by running **`npm init`** in the directory where your code will be stored. (To make initialization go faster, you can run `npm init -y` to say "yes" to all the set up questions.)

### package.json

After initializing w/ `npm init`, you'll find a `package.json` file in your directory. It contains three main things: 

1. **Metadata** about your project. (e.g., name, default entry JS file, etc.)
2. **Commands (i.e. scripts)** that you can execute for running/testing/distributing/etc. your code.
3. **Packages** your project depends on.

When `package.json` is first created, it has some default metadata & a simple placeholder script that runs the echo command when you run `npm run test` from the console. 

### Installing packages

To add/remove a package to/from your code, use these commands in your NPM-initialized directory:

- `npm install <package>`
- `npm uninstall <package>`

### What to include in your repo

NPM creates a folder `node_modules` that you do NOT want to include in source control system , as it gets very large:

- **Add `node_modules/` to your gitignore**

`node_modules` contains the actual JS files for your package and all its dependent packages. **All its contents can be rebuilt, however, w/ `paackage-lock.json`:** 

- When you clone your repo's source code to a new location, **run `npm install` in the project directory** to make NPM download all packages previously included in `node_modules/`.

`package-lock.json` tracks the version of each package you installed.

## Successors and competitors

Ryan Dahl, creator of Node.js, has created a successor called [Deno](https://deno.land/), meant to be more compliant w/ modern ECMAScript & provided significantly better performance.

There are also competitor JS applications. The notes mention one called [Bun](https://bun.sh/).

## Debugging Node.js

### Intro to VS Code Debugger

**Use VS Code's debugger** to debug JS on your machine. Execute the `Start Debugging` command by **pressing `F5`**.

The first time you debug your JS file, it will ask you what debugger/engine to use. **Select `Node.js`**. This will run your JS code w/ `node`.

Runtime keyboard shortcuts:

- `F10`: Step over.
- `F11`: Step in.
- `F5`: Continue running from current line.
- `SHIFT` + `F5`: Stop debugging.

### `node --watch`

By adding the `--watch` option when running your JS code w/ `node`, Node.js will automatically reload (restart and update the browser) when changes are saved *during debugging*.

To implement this in the VS Code Debugger, **modify `launch.json`**:

- Press `CTRL` + `SHIFT` + `P` to open the command pallette.
- Type to search `Debug: Add configuration` and run.
- Select the `Node.js` option.
  - This will create a launch configuration in `./.vscode/launch.json`.
- Modify your `"configurations"`: **Add `"--watch"` to the `"runtimeArgs"` list.**

E.g.:

```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    {
      "type": "node",
      "request": "launch",
      "name": "Launch Program",
      "skipFiles": ["<node_internals>/**"],
      "runtimeArgs": ["--watch"], /* <--- LOOKIE HERE */ 
      "program": "${workspaceFolder}/main.js"
    }
  ]
}
```
