2026 01 08  
CS 260  
Lee Jensen  
DAY ONE


# Class Info

## Why you're here

### You're more than your skills

"When hiring we look for the ability to collaborate, creativity, curiosity, and expertise." - Tim Cook, CEO of Apple.

In School, we oft focus on that latter thing&mdash;"expertise". But Tim is saying, to be a world-class company like Apple, you need to look beyond just skills.

e.g. for creativity: connecting linking to HTTP protocol&mdash;BEHOLD. The world wide web.

### Qualities

- Capable
- Creative
- Collaborative
- Curious
- **Christlike**
    - Your learning is based on Christlike principles.
        - e.g. you wake up in the morning and you're just grateful. And that makes you humble&mdash;you have so much to learn. Then your implore the divine bc you need help. Then, you don't just become a clever devil, but you use your skills to make a difference&mdash;to bring light to the world. Then, it's not that you have this work thing and this Christlike thing; all aspects of your life are about being Christlike.

## Canvas

The class is on Canvas.

- Assignments are submitted on Canvas
- Notifications to students are given through Canvas.

Previously, instructions and stuff were on GitHub. But now they're on Canvas, too.

## GitHub

This is where the class content is. 

- Schedule
    - Checkmarks: Assignments.
    - Spaceships: Deliverables.
        - This is where you do your "mastery demonstrations"
        - Submitted into Canvas.
- You'll clone the GitHub repo to your own public repo, and then you'll push your work to your repo. So TAs will look at your repo to grade your stuff.

## MasteryLS

MasteryLS is a website Prof. Jensen said bc "[he] was bored". It's just another place for all the course content, but easier to navigate.

It pulls content from GitHub, so it'll stay up to date w/ GitHub.

It's got AI built into it??

## Resources Needed

- Development machine (computer).
- $50 for AWS. Credits available.
    - Here you'll rent a server and lease a domain name.
    - AWS is free for a year tho. So $50 is a max.
    - But you WILL need a credit/debit card to use AWS.
        - But be careful! Jensen joked that it's easy to accidentally spend two grand.
- A focus on mastery instead of grades.
    - You're spending a lot of money & time to be here. If you're just focused on getting a badge at the end of your college career... A badge without the mastery is useless, but a master without the badge is merely unfortunate.

## AWS

- Jensen recommended using your BYU email b/c BYU's emails have been whitelisted.

## Technologies used in this class

- Command line.
- Git & GitHub.
- Web servers.
- Web protocols: HTTPS/WebSocket.
- Domain names, DNS.
    - You will rent your own DNS name. So come up with a cool one!
- Web certificates.
    - We'll cover security a bit in this class.
- Web design.
    - This isn't HCI, but we'll talk a little bit about it so that you can make things a little pretty and stuff.
    - We'll use Bootstrap for CSS. Whatever that means.
- Security.

You shouldn't need to use more than 100-200 lines for each technology.

## Front-end vs. Back-end

### Front-end

Front-end is **what your user sees.**

- HTML: Structure.
- CSS: Styling
- JS/React: Interactivity

### Back-end

- Server/Route53
- HTTP/WS
- Web services
- DB/Authentication

## WARNING

CS 260 has a 25% withdrawal/failure rate. This is for two reasons: It's a hard subject, and each deliverable builds off of the previous (so if you don't get one deliverable working, you can't do any of the deliverables after it). So stay with it, and stay current with it.

BUT the other 75% is A. So that's chill.

Jensen said **consistent daily effort** is a nigh-guarantee that you'll pass. 

## Demo App

On GitHub, there is a Simon app that is a project that Jensen wrote to serve as a demonstration for a project. Simon is to 260 as Pet Shop is to 240.

Simon is a super simple implementation of the technologies required for this class.

## AI policy

AI is great. Jensen uses it all the time; but he's only capable of using it effectively because he knows what it's doing.

So Jensen says he's OK with you using AI&mdash;but only as a learning tool. e.g. asking AI to explain code from the Simon project.

## Late policy

This class uses **grace days**.

- You start w/ 2 grace day. 
- You get an extra grace day for each day early.
- You spend a grace day for each day you are late.
- No grace days? No points. 

Grace days are listed in Canvas.

- For extenuating circumstances or flexible deadline accommodations, there's a form you can submit on Canvas&mdash;but you must submit the form *before* the due date.
- Grace days cannot be applied retroactively.
- There is no partial credit. Either you get full points because you had enough grace days, or you get no points because you didn't have enough grace days.

# Diving in

## Choosing a project

Jensen frames CS 260 as this: You're making your own startup.

While there you're required to use certain technologies, whatever project you do is your choice.

### 9 Deliverables

1. Spec: Specification & pitch
2. AWS: Server & DNS
      1. Not actually used until much later. But we do it now to make sure it's all working nicely.
3. HTML: Structure
4. CSS: Style
5. React #1: Web framework.
6. React #2: Interaction.
      1. By this point, all the front-end is done.
7. Service: Web Service endpoints.
8. Database/Login: Persisted app and auth data.
9. WebSocket: Data pushed from server, chat.

^ These are the ONLY things you'll submit & be graded on.

### Examples

- Simple game
- Peer chat
- URL sharing
- Shared story authoring
- Book reviews
- Geo-location sharing
- News sharing 
- Favorite website sharing
- Group voting
- Group calendaring
- Fitness tracking
- Weather sharing

Jensen encouraged that if you 


### Demo Day

At the end of the semester, everyone in CS 260 can submit (for a grade bump). Everyone votes, and the top three get the "Gheradeli suprirse" (Gheradeli chocolate + **letter of reference written by Jensen** + grade bump).

### For a project

Keep it...

- Simple
- Fun
- Simple
- Stretch you a *little*

Before you get into the extra stuff, make sure you've taken care of the stuff required for the deliverables.

## Git & GitHub

Git was made for Linus Torvalds (who also made Linux) in a weekend. "Talk is cheap. Show me the code."

GitHub takes your Git repo on your computer and clones it to somewhere online. This allows you to have a backup of your the repo you have on your repo, and it enables collaboration by letting someone else see your repo.

Part of the reason we have commits is to show proof of your work. 

