2026 01 08  
TMA 102: Intro to Film (LAB)  
TA: Maggie  
(LAB) DAY ONE

---

# Instructor Info

TA: Maggie.

Senior in Film program.

Favorite films:

- Goonies
- 1996 Romoe & Juliet (w/ Leo DiCaprio)
- La La Land
- Greta Gerwig's Little Women

Dad worked in the film industry.

# Class Info

<!-- Big lectures on Tuesdays @ 1:00 PM. Labs on Thursdays @ 2:00 PM. -->

## Textbooks

1. *Film Art - A Critical Introduction* (David Bordwell, Kristin Thomspon, and Jeff Smith. **13th Edition**)
2. *Thinking About Film: A Critical Perspective* (Dean Duncan. This one is a paper packet thing.)

## Class Layout

- LECTURE w/ Prof
    - Tuesdays @ 1:00-2:50 PM in the Varsity Theater in the Wilk.
    - Each week we'll go over a new film topic.
- LAB w/ TA
    - Thursdays @ 2:00-2:50 PM
    - Maggie tries to show a lot of film clips that have examples of the concepts we go over.
- CLASSIC CINEMA
    - A screening of a classic film picked out by the instructors. 
    - A few showings each week.
    - You will watch them and write a paper on it.

## Assignments

Spread out throughout the semester:

- Standards Paper
- Theatrical Film Anlysis
    - Near the end of the semester
- Reflection Paper
- Final Exam

Due weekly:

- Quizzes
    - Assigned based on weekly readings from txtbks.
    - Due before class each week.
    - Super short. Readings are not long, Maggie says.
- Classic Cinema & Thought Papers

### Standards Paper

- Due Fri, Jan 23rd @ midnight.
- 1000-1500 words (3-4 pages double-spaced).
- Part 1: *When you see a movie, why do you choose the movie you do? What makes you decide one movie over another?*
- Part 2: They'll screen a film for you in classic cinema. You'll watch that film and then evaluate based on the criteria you wrote out in Part 1.

More in-depth instructions are on LS and will be covered later in lecture.

### Quizzes

- Take online.
- Open book.
- ~30 mins to complete.
- Must be completed BEFORE lecture.
    - They introduce you to what you'll talk ab in class.
- Contact Maggie w/ problems, e.g. late quizzes.

### Classic Cinema

- MUST attend classic cinema each week.
    - Attendance will be taken.
    - A lot of the films they show are harder to find. 
- Films are chosen to correlate to that week's concepts.
- Showings:
    - Wed @ 6 PM
    - Fri @ 6 PM
    - Sat @ 10 AM
- Screenings are shown in 1170 TMCB. (Wait that's dope I live in that building.)
- Your weekly thought paper will be written on the Classic Cinema showing done that week.

The International Cinema showings are different from the Classic Cinema showings.

### Thought Papers

- 1 page, single-spaced, 12pt. font, Times New Roman.
- Submitted on LS.
- Don't forget your name, date, and title!
- You'll talk how the theme of the Classic Cinema film connects to the element of film discussed in lecture/lab that week.
    - Ask yourself: "How does the film communicate a theme using the element of the week?"
    - You specifically discuss about the way the film uses what was taught in class that week. 
- Content/structure:
    - Clear thesis statement + theme.
    - Specific examples.
    - Avoid plot summaries. All the TAs grading your papers have already seen the film.
    - This is an anlysis on the film. Avoid discussing what you "liked" or "didn't like".

## "Theme" definition

- "Love, Hate, Fear, etc." are not themes.
    - In the film world, a "theme" is a sentence. 
- E.g.: "Learning to embrace change can mean looking outside of yourself" is a theme of *Toy Story*.
- A film can have multiple themes.
- How to find a theme:
    - What is the film trying to say? and how was it saying it?
- When discussing/analyzing a theme:
    - General message, connected to editing & film-making techniques.

This info & stuff we'll be discussed in lecture. We'll also go over an example paper in a future lab, before your first one is due.

## Plagiarism

- Make sure any quotes are cited correctly.
    - Citations may be in whatever form, but keep it consistent.

### AI Policy

- Don't use AI for the papers. 
- The papers are fr fr easy and short, Maggie says. 
- If you're struggling to understand a concept, come to Maggie to work it out (instead of going straight to AI).
- Thought papers will be submitted in TurnItIn, which checks for AI.

The syllabus has more information that goes in depth on AI policy and what kind of AI use is/isn't permitted. Maggie recommended we go read it.

## Attendance Policy

Attendance is taken in both labs and lectures.

- Up to 4 unexcused absences.
- You need 75% attendance to pass.
- If you arrive 15 mins late w/o telling Maggie beforehand, you'll be marked absent.
    - So if you're shuttling over from campus, let Maggie know.

## Latework Policy

Late work is allowed w/ partial credit.

- 5% docked each day they are late.
- Assignments are open for a week.
    - After the week is over, you can still contact Maggie to submit it for 50%.

If you're not going to be able to turn smth late, let Maggie know and you can work stuff out w/ her. She emphasized that she wants us to credit for everything.

## Creating a safe learning environment

There is no right way to make films. So everyone is going to have different views. So respect others.

Let Maggie know if you feel like the lab does not feel like a safe learning environment.

---

# Why do you watch movies?

Why is film so important? Why should we become media literate?

- One student enjoyed breaking down movies' thematic elements.
- One student said movies are an escape for them.
- One student said the movies that spoke to him most are the ones that aren't an escape, but rather those that he finds himself in. When he can relate to a movie, or apply it to his own life,,, those are the movies that hit hardest for him.
- One student did theater in high school. So appreciation for the arts has always been a big thing for her and her family. Any time she watches a really good movie, it evokes really intense emotions and stuff, and that's her favorite part about watching movies.
- One student took the International Cinema class last semester. This student said it was so amazing how films have the ability to not only break out the norm but then to go back and commentate on it.
- One student loved cinematography. She felt she had been trained to watch films w/ the mindset of a cinematographer. She talked ab making everyday moments of life look beautiful&mdash;and more meaningful.
- One student said she's a writer, so she's really passionate about the craftsmenship of storytelling.
    - She also said that media literacy is important not only socially but religiously. 

---

# Movies Mentioned

- The Goonies
- 1996 Romeo & Juliet (w/ Leo DiCaprio.)
- Ghost in the Shell
- People's favorite movies:
    - Ferris Bueller's Day Off (1986)
    - Akira
    - Secret Life of Walter Mitty
    - ⭐ Goodwill Hunting
    - Isle of Dogs (Wes Anderson)
    - Ponyo
    - ⭐ Mcfarland USA
    - Back to the Future
    - Raiders of the Lost Arc
    - ⭐ Count of Monte Cristo
    - LOTR Trilogy
    - ⭐ Arrival
    - Transformers (the old ones)
    - ⭐ When Harry Missed Sally
    - La La Land
    - ⭐ The Imitation Game
    - ⭐ Se7en
    - Inglorious Bastards
- Challengers (2024)
- Rear Window (1954)
- Pride & Prejudice (2005)
- Upcoming Classic Cinema:
    - Whale Rirder
    - Safety Last
- Fantastic Mr. Fox (2009)
