2026 01 07  
CS 324  
Casey Deccio  
DAY ONE

# Instructor Info

## Prof: Casey Deccio

> Casey Deccio
> Email: casey@byu.edu
> Phone: 801-422-5319
> Office: 3368 TMCB
> Hours: TBD

"Deccio" is pronounced D-C-O. Which is kinda funny because "Casey" is pronounced K-C. So his full name is pronounced K-C D-C-O.

Worked in some gov labs in Cali or smth, then moved to the East Coast in industry at a co. called VeraSign. After three years there he came here to teach @ BYU and has been teaching here ever since.

Married w/ 5 kids.

## TAs

TA office hours are in LS > Content > TA Hours / Location

# Syllabus

Deccio encourages you use TA hours and his office hours.

## Late Work

Submitting an assignment late caps the max score you can get. But you still get partial credit for late work.

- 2 days (48 hrs) late: 90% max
- 4 days (96 hrs) late: 80% max
- More than 4 days late: 70% max

Sundays are not included in the late day count. (This is to avoid being penalized for keeping the Sabbath holy.)

Each student is given 5 "grace days" which you can apply to any assignment throughout the semester.

Assignments cannot be submitted after the last day of classes. (This is enforced by BYU.)

## Exams

2 midterms, 1 final exam.

- Testing center
- Multiple choice :)

## Classroom procedures

- No electronics. Deccio encourages pen-and-paper note taking (or simple electronic devices with no other function besides note-taking).
    - Which does mean we will not be following along doing code stuff in class. But that's what the HWs are for&mdash;they will have you do what we did in class, so that the repitition helps embed the knowledge into your brain. 
- Deccio encourages reading the textbook before each class.
    - Textbook readings will be on the LS Schedule.
- Each week, there will be a preparation quiz you do to make sure you're familiar w/ what we're covering in the class.
    - T/F, multiple choice, fill-in-the-blank questions.

Deccio's teaching style doesn't use slides (outside of review slides in the beginning sometimes). Instead he writes on the whiteboard. The slides Deccio does use will be in LS as well (under Content).

## Attendance

No attendance! 

Deccio used to grade attendance (self-graded, 2% of the grade) to incentivise you to go to class, but this semester Deccio is letting the inherit helpfulness of coming to class be the incentive. (Deccio noted that something else will replace that 2%.)

## Teaching philosophy

Deccio values repitition: A topic will be introduced in class, revisited shortly thereafter in a following class, and then revisited again in a HW. Then again in a Lab. 

## Computer Environment

While the concepts taught in this class will apply to any language & environment, they apply slightly different btwn each one. So for this class, we'll use the C language and develop in a Linux-based operating system.

The primary platform for development is the CS lab machines for consistency. Auto-graded assignments are graded on the CS lab machines, so if you don't use them while developing your code, you should still test it on them. There will be a few things throughout the semester that you MUST use the lab machines for tho.

## Honor Code

Maintain the Honor Code. Deccio emphasized the Honor Code's requirement to respect others: Everyone is welcome here at BYU.

## Preventing Sexual Misconduct

BYU has a Title IX office.

Deccio said it's OK to go to him w/ questions ab sexual misconduct, but noted that he is obligated to report incidents of sexual misconduct to the Title IX Office.

## AI Policy

There are three levels to AI use:

1. To help learn concepts. This is totally OK.
2. To generate code. This is totally not OK.
3. To evaluate code. (Debugging, helping to understand what code is doing, etc.) Exhaust your other resources first.

Deccio said to absolutely use AI for learning concepts. (But with the precaution that ofc it's not always correct.)

Unless allowed specifically for an assignemnt, you may NOT use AI for generating code. Part of the learning for this class is writing the code.

Level 3&mdash;evaluating code&mdash;is a tricky one. Deccio wants students to be capable of seeing a chunk of code to see what it's doing, as well as to be able to troubleshoot on their own. So Deccio asked that we only use AI for code evaluation if you've exhausted all other resources.

Deccio said that test scores have gone down the past few semesters, while tests haven't changed. Deccio suspects that might correlate with the prominence of AI.

# Other class info

## Assignments

HW1 is Due Mon. (Not yet posted on LS.)

General cadence:

- Due every Friday: Either a HW or a Lab.
    - No assignment due on midterm week.
- Due every Tuesday: Preparation Quizzes.

# Jumping in

## Wtf is "Systems Programming"?

The key in "Systems Porgramming" is "Systems". It refers to **interacting w/ the OS**.

For this class, we're going to be taking away some of the magic you've taken for granted. For this reason, Deccio likes to subtitle this class "The Magic of Computing". Each class period, he aims to show us a (computing) magic trick, he said.

## System-provided inputs

Programs are always compiled the same, but the system gives you three inputs you can use at runtime.

1. Standard input. ("keyboard input" by default.)
2. Command-line arguments. (args inputted into `main` function.)
3. Environment variables.

Every program ALWAYS gets these every time. (It may not take or use them, but it's given them.)

### Command-line arguments

Command-line arguments are inputted into the `main` function of your C program.

The first argument (`argv[0]`) is the name of your program (which is true in any programming language). (This means  that `argc`, the number of command-line args, will always be 1 or greater.)

### Environment variables

Environment variables are:

- Name-value pairs.
    - Both the name and the value are strings.
    - By convention, the name is in all-caps.  
- To set an env var in the command-line (two ways):
   1. `FOO=myval ./hello`
        - Sets for a **single invocation**.
   2. `export FOO=myval` <br> ... <br> `./hello`
        - Sets for **this and all future invocations** in this running shell. 
            - ("shell" == command-line instance.)
- Getting
    - In C: `getenv("name")`
        - If `getenv` does not find an environment variable with the name you inputted, it looks like it returns `NULL` (NOT in a string?).

#### Environment Variables in Memory

```
MEMORY BLOCK ILLUSTRATION
 ____________
|  env vars  |
|____________|
| global vars|
|____________|
|            |
|    stack   |
|      |     |
|      v     |
|            |
|      ^     |
|      |     |
|    heap    |
|____________|
|            |
|    code    |
|____________|
```