2026 03 31  
CS 270  
Quinn Snell  

# The Curse of Dimensionality

- DEF: As the number of features or dimensions within a dataset increases, the amt of data needed to effectively generalize or make accurate predictions increases *exponentially*.

```math
N_{data} \propto k^n
```

Because of this curse, as you add more features, your model's performance will increase...until a certain point, when the curse will kick in, and the model will get worse (bc you don't have enough data for how many dimensions you've added to your model).

How to beat this curse? You can either "incorporate domain knowledge" (whatever tf that means), or you can **reduce the dimensionality**. Our next two classes will talk about methods for reducing dimensionality.

## Feature Selection & Feature Reduction

There was a FAT slide on this that was so dense with words I didn't even try to write it down.

### Feature Selection

#### Filters

Given a set of ($n$) features, **find a subset of features** that produces good results.

PROCESS: Train your model $n$ times, each time training on a single feature. Then choose the top however-many features that individually provided the best performances.

But then...what if the optimal feature selection is some from the top and some from the bottom???

#### Wrappers

Creates a "wrapper" around your learning algorithm:

1. Pass a feature subset to learning algorithm.
2. Create train/test set based on feature subset.
3. Train learning algorithm w/ the train set.
4. Find accuracy (objective) w/ validation set.
5. Repeat 1-4 for all feature subsets you want to test.
6. Pick the subset w/ the highest predictive accuracy.

That will take foreeevvveeerrrr because that's "a big search space". If you're doing this, your data probably has a lot of features, so this will take a loongngnggnnnnnggggg time to test a ton of subsets.

There's "forward searching" & "backward searching". But both are greedy and $O(n^2 \times \text{learning/test time})$.

## PCA: Principal Components Analysis

Put your math hats on everybody!!!

- PCA:
  - LINEAR method for dimensionality reduction.
    - Looks at **linear relationships**.
      - This may not always be sufficient or the best. BUT it's faster (I think).
      - (We'll look at the non-linear methods next time.)
  - **Works well in cases where data features have *mostly linear correlations***.
  - Uses eigenvalues/vectors!!! (WOAH! IT'S ALL CONNECTED)
  - Unsupervised.
    - Does not consider the output class/value of an instance.
      - (There are other alogirithms that do&mdash;e.g. linear discriminant analysis)

(Dr. Snell will introduce this concept w/ 2D or 3D data, but know that it works for any $n$ dimensional dataset.)

- Transform $n$-dimensional standardized\normalized data into a new $n'$-dimensional basis, where $n' < n$.
  - For the new basis, its axes (the basis vecs) will be "ordered" by the dataset's original features/dimensions that were most important.
    - Idk what he means by "ordered"...since axes aren't rly ordered.
    - ^ Or maybe I'm just completely misunderstanding him idk.
  - ^ This helps to eliminate dimensions. Or some shih.

Eigenvalues represent variance (somehow).

Dawg wtf are we talking ab.

### Mathematics behind PCA

```math
\text{var}(X) = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^n (X_i - \bar X)(X_i - \bar X)}{n-1}
```

&nbsp;

```math
\text{cov}(X, Y) = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^n (X_i - \bar X)(Y_i - \bar Y)}{n-1}
```

- Variance ($\text{var}$) is a measure of data spread in one feature/dimension.
- Covariance ($\text{cov}$) is how two things vary w/ relationship to each other.
  - High covariance means two featrues are similar.
- You will calculate the covariance for every possible pair of features, then put that info into a "covariance matrix". 
  - This matrix is SYMMETRIC.

> [!NOTE]
> When doing PCA w/ data, you must (either) normalize or standardize your data.

#### Covariance Matrix

- Covariance matrix:
  - $n \times n$ symmetric matrix (for $n$ features).
  - IDK he whizzed past the slide lul.

So, for a dataset with features $x_1, x_2, x_3, \dots, x_n$, the covariance matrix looks like:

```math
\begin{bmatrix}
\text{cov}(x_1,x_1) && \text{cov}(x_1,x_2) && \dots && \text{cov}(x_1, x_n) \\
\text{cov}(x_2,x_1) && \text{cov}(x_2,x_2) && \dots && \text{cov}(x_2, x_n) \\
\vdots && \vdots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\text{cov}(x_n,x_1) && \text{cov}(x_n,x_2) && \dots && \text{cov}(x_n,x_n)
\end{bmatrix}
```

Then, you want to find the basis for that matrix. Which you will use eigenvecs/vals for. 

I remember vaguely something about how certain eigenvalues contribute the most to...smth ab the matrix. (Idrk what. I remember it came up when we were talking ab using eigenvals for lossy image compression tho.) So that's the principle we're using when we use these eigenvalues.

> [!NOTE]
> You will NOT be expected to calculate eigenvals/vecs. You will let numpy and/or sklearn do the calculations for you (see below).

```math
\text{Proportion of Variance}
```
```math
\frac{\sum_{i=1}^p \lambda_i}{\sum_{j=1}^n \lambda_j} = \frac{\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \dots + \lambda_p}{\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \dots + \lambda_p + \dots + \lambda_n}
```

IDK what that formula means but...it looks kinda familiar to smth I saw in MATH 213...

#### Watch what happens if you normalize the eigvals

Suppose you standardized your eigvals $\lambda_1, \lambda_2, \dots, \lambda_n$, such that $s_1 + s_2 + \dots + s_n = 1$. Then, **any $100 \times s_k$ represents $x_k$'s percentage of variance.** I.e., any feature $x_k$ describes $100 \times s_k$ percent of the dataset's variation. ($\forall 1 \le k \le n$)

### Summary of PCA steps

1. Standardize the Training Set (TS) features.
2. Calculate the covariance mtx of the standardized TS.
3. Calculate the unit eigenvecs/vals of the cov mtx.
4. Keep the $p$ eigenvecs w/ largest eigenvals (where $p < n$).
5. Mtx mult the $p$ eigenvecs w/ the standardized TS to get a new TS w/ only $p$ features.

#### In Python

With Numpy:

```py
# 1: Standardize training set
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
scaler = StandardScaler()
scaler.fit(X)
X_scaled = scaler.transform(X)

# 2: Calculate covariance matrix
cov_mtx = np.cov(X_scaled.T)

# 3: Calculate covariance matrix's eigenvectors & eigenvalues
eigvals, eigvecs = np.linalg.eig(cov_mtx) # returns in order of highest eig vals

# 4: Keep the p eigvecs w/ largest eigvals (where p < n)
proj_mtx = (eigvecs.T[:][:p]).T

# 5: Mtx mult p eigvecs w/ standardized training set
X_pca = X_scaled.dot(proj_mtx)
```

With sklearn:

```py
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

# you still have to standardize your data
scaler = StandardScaler()
scaler.fit(X)
X_scaled = scaler.transform(X)

# but sklearn does steps 2-5 for you
pca = PCA(n_components=p)
pca.fit(X_scaled)
X_pca = pca.transform(X_scaled)
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> 
> Whenever you transform your training set, you must **apply the same transformation to your test data**.
> 
> BUT! **You must never use your test data when fitting the transformation**. Doing so would introduce data leakage.

##### Pipelining

Dr. Snell uses an sklearn pipeline to easily move data from one step to the next.

```py
pca_pipeline = Pipeline([
  ('scaler', StandardScaler()),
  ('pca', PCA(n_components=your_value_here)),
  ('classifier', MLPClassifier(...)) 
])
```

Dr. Snell showed us a whole notebook that demonstrated doing ML stuff w/ PCA...but I lowkirkenuinely zoned out through the whole thing.
