2026 01 08  
CS 270: Machine Learning  
Quinn Snell  
DAY ONE: INTRO
---

# Instructor Info

Prof has poor hearing. (He worked in a printing press during college at a time where hearing protection wasn't really a thing.)

Grew up in Rexburg, ID ("Yeahhh I know"). 

Went to Ricks College, Utah State, and Iowa State. Came to BYU in 1997 and has been here since. (Going on 30 yrs now.)

Family facts:

- 8 kids in mixed family.
- 4 kids are married.
- 1 set of twins
- Pets: 8 dogs, 2 cats, 1 horse.

## Classes taught by Prof

- CS 270
    - Neural networks, clustering, decision trees, etc.
- CS 482 & CS 483: Data Science Capstone
    - In this class, you do projects for companies. It gives you real-world ML experience. 
    - Prof strongly encourages all of us to do this class.  
- CS 574: Natural Language Processing w/ Transformers
    - Large language models.

## Research

- Natural Language Processing
    - Using NLP to extract data from unstructured text and analyze it. 
    - LLMs and stuff.
- Computation Health Sciences
    - Natural Language Processing of Twitter tweets related to COVID-19.
    - Data anlysis of Utah Middle Schoool and High School student surveys.
- Retrieval Augmented Generation

# Class Info

## Wtf we doing in CS 270

Typically in programming, you write a deterministic program $F$ that takes an input $X$ and produces an output $Y$:

$$X \rightarrow F(X) = Y \rightarrow Y$$

But in this class, we're not going to write that function. Instead, we're going to make a model that *learns* that function. 

You give a computer a bunch of $X$/$Y$ pairs to learn from, and it learns to generalize $Y$'s for $X$'s not sampled.

(The output will be nondeterministic.)

Why is that good? Well, you can create a program that can operate in situations that a deterministic program can't feasibly do.

### Inductive Machine Learning

- Gather a *data set* of labeled examples from some task. Then divide them into a *training set* and a *test set*.
    - Speech recognition, medical diagnoses, financial forecasting, doc classification, etc.
- Train a learning model (neural network, etc.) on the training set until it solves it well.
    - Looks for patterns and stuff.
- The goal is to *generalize* on novel data not yet seen.
    - Learns the data so well that it doesn't just memorize the data but is able to generalize it.
    - The *test set* is used to train the model.
- Use the learning system to predict new examples.

### The big question

How do you train a ML model to solve a problem? And stuff. Or smth. Idrk he's going kinda fast through these slides.

# Syllabus 

## Class procedures

### Discord

This class is on Discord. TAs are there. Snell encourages us to talk amongst ourselves and problem solve together.  (Yay!) 

(But still you should be doing your own work.)

### zyBooks

We'll use zyBooks for the electronic textbook.

The *best* way to connect to zyBooks is by clicking the link in this class's first assignemnt on LS.

### Programming Labs

Uhhhh I think we use Colab or smth idrk.'

The Notebooks for labs are in LS > Content > Labs.

### Learning Suite

Snell heavily uses the Schedule tab in LS.

The Notebooks for labs are in LS > Content > Labs. They are pulled from a GitHub repo. (Very cool.)

### Speed

There are 12 chapters in this book, and we have 13 weeks. So that's a chapter a week.

## Do your own work

Snell encourages you to talk w/ other students. BUT *do your own work*. This includes AI.

### AI Policy

This is (ironically) a **no AI course**. Snell referenced a recent study done at MIT.

With this policy, Snell's goal isn't to make you not know how to use it; his goal is to make you **know when it's wrong**.

## Assignments

- ZyBooks assignments (readings? idk) are due **every Saturday**.
    - Snell has found that students do better if they know there's a cadence.
    - Don't wait, Snell said. Get on it early. They're p straight forward, but some will take longer than others.
- Every now and then there are labs due on Saturdays as well.
    - Notebooks for labs

## Late Policy

- Labs: You are given 4 grace days you can play with. 
- ZyBooks: No late work allowed. 
    - If there's a need, Snell may push ZyBook deadlines a day or two, he said. (I couldn't tell if he meant a need for the class (like, everyone's behind) or a need for an individual.)

## Attendance Policy

Snell does not take attendance.

That said, this is an in-person class. Snell does not record lectures on Zoom, and he believes there's stuff you'll learn in here that you wouldn't learn by perusing ZyBooks.

To encourage attendance, there will be in-lecture quizzes. (Not every day, but most days.) They're dead simple&mdash;as long as you're in class. You need a password to take them, but you can only get that password if you're in class.

You most likely won't be notified ahead of time that a lecture will have a quiz.

Quizzes total to 4% of your final grade.

## Exams

- A midterm and a final. 
- Each test will have two parts to it:
    - Part 1: In the testing center. 
    - Part 2: LS exam which will have you download a Python notebook, write code, and then reupload the notebook to LS.
        - Proctored w/ Proctorio.