2026 03 24  
CS 270  
Quinn Snell  
CLUSTERING  

# Clustering

- Agglomerative: Bottom-up.
- ???: Top-down.

## HAC

HIERARCHIAL AGGLOMERATIVE CLUSTERING.

Ts looks kinda like amoebas merging together.

- Start w/ every data point in its own cluster. Then, find the two closest clusters, and join them. Do this until everything is in the same cluster. Finally, look at the history of clustering (dendrogram), and decide how to cut your big cluster into smaller clusters.

### Dendrogram representation

- Dendrograms?????

### Deciding clusters

- Single linkage (nearest neighbor).
  - Works best when groups are dense.
- Complete linkage (farthest neighbor).
- Average linkage.
- Ward linkage. 

Idk man he zooms past these slides it's pretty stupid.

Different algorithms work better on different datasets. So **understand your data** and **understand your algorithms**. (But also there are some measures you can use.)

### HAC

HAC has $n^2$ complexity for adjacenty mtx or smth.

## K-Means

They go over ts in CS 180.

ALGORITHM:

1. Randomly choose $k$ instances from the data set to be the initial $k$ "centroids".
2. Repeat until no more changes (or only negligible changes) occur:
   1. Group each instance w/ closest centroid.
   2. Recalculate the centroid based on its new cluster.

Time complexity is $O(mkn)$, where $m$ is # of itrs, and spaces is $O(n)$. This is much better than HAC's time/space ($n^3$ and $n^2$, respectively).

DISADVANTAGES: 

- Always tries to make hyperspherical clusters.
  - Not great w/ non-globular shapes.
- Tries to make each cluster ~the same size.
  - Not great w/ different-sized clusters.
- Not great w/ clusters w/ different densities.

## DBSCAN

- Density-based algorithm.
  - Density = # of pts w/in a specified radius. (epsilon ("eps"))
  - CORE POINT: Points that has more than a specified # of pts (MinPts) w/in Eps are called **core points**.
  - BORDER POINT: A point that has few;a;as;ddflhas spoif hasofgoas dfas[fhkias gfoas fua[sdofhg9aw gf0awfu pawfh]]
  - NOISE POINT:

Very sensitive to hyperparams.

## Automated clustering scores

How do you tell which algorithm is best for your data? There are some measures&mdash;but there is no perfect way.

### Compactness

- Compactness = members of a cluster are all similar and close together

```math
\text{Comp}(C) = \sum_{i=1}^{|X_c|}(c-x_i)^2
```

- $c$ is centroid of cluster $C$, made up of instances $X_c$.
- Lower is better.

DISADVANTAGES: 

- What if your data is not dense? 
- What if it is weirdly shaped? 
  - Centroids might not clearly indicate cluster. (Centroids are like the center of mass of a cluster btw.)

BEST CLUSTERING:

- Best clustering is ALWAYS the one where every point is its own clustering. (B/c then for each point the distance from its centroid is zero.)

### Separability


- SEPARABILITY: Dissimilarity btwn clusters.
  - How many members of one cluster are sufficiently different from members of another cluster.

Looks at how far apart centroids are.

```math
Bro showed an equation then moved on.
```

DISADVNTAGES:

- Again, if data is weirdly shaped, then centroids don't clearly indicate clusters.

### Silhouette

- Combined measure inter-cluster similarity & intra-cluster dissimilarity.
- Calculates $a(i)$ and $b(i)$ for every element $i$.
  - $a(i)$ = avg dissimilarity of instance $i$ to all other instances in $i$'s cluster.
    - Want this to be SMALL.
  - $b(i)$ = SMALLEST avg disimilarity of instances $i$ to instances in OTHER clusters.
    - Want this to be LARGE.
- Can be costly.



```math
s(i) = \frac {b(i) - a(i)} {\max\Big(a(i), b(i)\Big)}
```

Hence, $-1 \le s(i) \le 1$