2026 03 10  
CS 270  
Quinn Snell  

---

- Ermmm... so I missed ALL of last week's classes (and didn't do the zybook) so we'll see how this goes.
  - Last week I believe we talked ab neural networks and "back proprogation", whatever ts is.
- WE ONLY HAVE FOUR WEEKS LEFT IN THE SEMESTER AUUGGHGHGHGHHHH.

# Huh

- Output nodes
- Hidden nodes
- Neuron activation function
  - Sigmoid function?
- Error surfaces
- Back proprogation
- Learning rate
- $\Delta w_{pq}$

# Error Surfaces or back proproagation or smth

From what I know, neural networks are all about reducing errors over multiple iterations. An error surface is the error as a function of input parameters. When modelled in a graph, if you have 2 parameters, it looks like a surface (where at any point $(x, y, z)$, $y$ is the error, and $x,z$ are the parameters.). (And ig we just continue to call it an error surface even if we have more than 2 params?)

## Network Error and Gradient... also hidden nodes or some shih

Upon each iteration, we want to move downward the error surface. You want to move in the direction w/ the highest (negative) slope&mdash;meaning those tweaking parameters in that direction decreases the error function more than any other tweaking.

Dr. Snell said smth ab multiplying error function & slope.

<!-- ```math
E_d = \frac 1 2 \sum_{k \in \text{outputs}} (t_k - o_k)^2
``` -->

Dr. Snell showed some formulas showing how you take the derivative of your error function to get its slope. The process uses chain rule.

<!-- Bro these slides are lowk terrible. Just a wall of text and formulas. -->

There were sums and a $net_q$ or smth...

The derivation ended w/ this formula:

```math
\Delta w_{pq} = c(t_q - z_q)z_q(1-z_q)z_p
```

- $c$ is the **learning rate**.
- $z$ is also sometimes written as $o$. Idk what it means tho.
  - The slides use $o$. But $o$ sucks.

Something something hidden nodes wtf are we talking ab...

After some more random shih, the formula comes to this:

```math
\Delta w_{pq} = c\delta_q z_p
```

- LEARNING RATE x DERIVATIVE x OUTPUT

You can make this all into a big matrix multiplication, like how Dr. Snell said he showed us last time.

### Forwards or some shih

STEPS:

1. Dot product.
2. Activation function.
3. Push to next layer. (Return to step 1.)

### Backwards or some shih

Must push back using slope of the (hyper) tangent??? What tf is he talking ab?????? 

"You can't push the error back to every node in the hidden layer, you have to push the appropriate weight back" or sm shih.

<!-- Why did I take this class bruv. -->

You're trying to minimize your error at each layer or sm shih.

# RIP

At this point, I gave up on trying to follow along w/ the lecture and played Cool Math Games.

# Random shih for lab

- ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS: Many differenet ones have been created over the decades.
- LEARNING RATE: Typically small, btwn 0.1-0.5.
- Inductive bias & weight initialization.
  -  Keep weights on small side initially.

# Regularization w/ NN

- NN doesn't use L1 b/c it's not differentiable.
  - L2 allows you to stay differentiable.

# Misc

- ADAM is a popular algorithm to start w/.
- Dr. Martinez showed batch update is (on average) less efficient. (2003.)
  - But there does exist neural nets that you have to use a batch w/.
- Dropout.
  - Not available in sklearn, but important for deep neural networks.