2026 01 13  
REL C 200: The Eternal Family  
Casey Griffiths  

# Questions to consider

1. What are the different kind of teachings in the Church?
2. What are the most important sources in determining our doctrine & beliefs?
3. Do we believe the Prophets are infallible?

# The Family Proc's Authorship

At the very beginning of the Fam Proc, it says "WE, THE FIRST PRESIDENCY" or smth like that. But of those who wrote the Fam Proc, only Eyering and Oaks are still alive. But we still consider it doctrine. ...Why?

# Breaking down issues in the family

As with any other doctrine, you start with simplicity, then run it through a complex lens, and then through that you return to a simple lens again. 

For an analogy: Simplicity is like standing on the bank of a river; complexity is like jumping into it. But after you cross the river, you are back to simplicity, but like w/ having made a journey or smth idrk.

e.g.: Simple: "I am a Child of God". Then: "What does it mean to be a child of God? Is that literal, is that figurative? If it's literal, is there a Heavenly Mother&mdash;a Heavenly Grandmother, Heavenly Grandfather?". Then after you've thought through all that, you come to a simple conclusion again.

# What is truth?

D&C 93:24: Jesus defines truth: "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (Past, present, future.)

<!-- If you believe there was an ancient civilization in the Americas that worshipped Jesus and was visited by him after  -->

# Doctrine

Understanding things as they are requires **doctrine**.

Types of teachings (from a book by Elder David A. Bednar):

- Core, eternal doctrines. 
- Supporting teachings.
    - Supplement
- Policies.
- Esoteric teachings.
    - Might not have been fully explained to us.

Most teachings in the church change&mdash;because while we are a true church, we are also a *living* church.

## Core doctrine

- Truth. The truest of truth.
- Eternal, does not change.
- Pertain to eternal progression & exaltation. 

The core doctrines of the gospel of Jesus Christ are **relatively few in number.**

### Examples

- The Atonement of Jesus Christ.
- We are Children of God.
    - If you see the people around you as Children of God, you are a different person.
- Making covenants.
- Repentance.

## Supporting Teachings

- Explanatory of core doctrines.
- Very important, but usually depend on a core doctrine in some way.

### Examples

- Core teaching: Make covenants w/ God. Supporting teaching: We can do that on behalf of people who have passed away.
    - We wouldn't believe in covenant work w/ the dead if we didn't believe in covenant work in the first place.
- Core teaching: Making covenants. Supporting teaching: Making covenants via baptism.
- Temple ordinances. We wouldn't be doing those if covenants weren't a big deal.
    - Aside: We are not doing the same temple ordinances we have always done.
- Sacrament. 
    - (We have not always  done the sacrament&mdash;we did the passover then.)
    - (You can find the place in the NT where )

## Policy Teachings

- Change from time to time to fit the needs of the church.
- Based in core doctrines and come through revelation.

### Examples

- Missionary age.
- Temple announcements: Pres. Oaks has decided to start announcing temples in the place where they're being built.
- Deacons passing the sacrament.
    - Deacons were not always the ones to pass. (Wait wtf. Why is that way now, then.)
- Who's allowed to have the priesthood.
    - David O. McKay was the first person to use the language of "policy" when referring to black people not being allowed the Priesthood.
- Core teaching: Your body is sacred. Policy teaching: Word of Wisdom.
    - Our health codes these days is not the same as those in the scriptures.
- Plural marriage. (Could also maybe be a supporting teaching? It kinda crosses.)

## Esoteric Teachings

- Might not yet be fully explained, or require further revelation to understand.

### Examples

- Heavenly Grandpa.
    - We have no idea if there's a Heavenly Grandpa lmao.
- People living on other worlds.
    - Taught in Moses 1, but we have nothing known about those other worlds.
- Where in the Americas the events of the BoM took place.
- Cain is Bigfoot.
- Wtf is the afterlife actually fr like? What clothes do we wear? 
- If you've been sealed to two people, will you have two spouses in the next life? 
    - Pres. Oaks himself said he doesn't know.

## Many concepts cross between these categories

Many concepts do not entirely fit into a single one of these categories. e.g., Heavenly Mother.

# Source

Which of these sources take priority? 

- Standard works: Bible/BoM/D&C/Pearl of Great Price
- Book written by the Church itself. (e.g. *Preparing to Enter the Holy Temple.*)
- Book by a General Authority.
- Book by a scholar.
- Article from *Liahona*.
- *Fam Proc*.

&nbsp;

1. Standard works / *Fam Proc*. (Griffiths didn't say which he thought should take higher priority)
2. Smth written by the Church itself.
3. The *Liahona*: The priority of the article depends on the author, but as a whole there's a lot of articles that are just like children stories & stuff.
4. Book by a General Authority: It's one individual's perspective. (Almost all GAs who write a book will preface it with, "These are my thoughts, not the church's.")
5. Book by a scholar: Their academic status does not make give them authority in the church.

## Teachings origins

Griffiths said two ways new teachings came. Uh...I missed what they were tho. I think it was revelation to an individual and council btwn authorities. e.g. Acts 10 (revelation&mdash;the church is available to Jew *and* Gentile) vs. Acts 15 (council&mdash;convert Gentiles don't have to get circumcised). 




# Reliable Sources for Church Teachings


## Harmonized Scriptural Canon

Emphasis on "harmonized".

# Issues

- When talking ab how the church's stance on birth control has changed, he talked ab how it was in according to technological advancements and birth control getting safer, etc. ...Except what about church members & authorities just being bigoted?

