2026 01 08  
REL C 200  
Casey Griffiths  
DAY ONE  

# Prof Info

# Class Info

## Attendance/Reading Quizzes

For each class, there is a quiz. It asks two things: 

1. Did you attend class? 
2. Have you done the readings for next class?

If you lie, you'll go to hell, Griffiths (jokingly) said.

## Class Procedures

Class is discussion-based. To alleviate the awkwardness of silence that comes when waiting for students to develop their thoughts, Griffiths presents the questions he'll ask that lecture at the beginning of each class.

## Course Overview

- UNIT 1: The Plan & the Family
- UNIT 2: Gender & Eternal Identity
- UNIT 3: The covenants you make in the temple, and why that's important.
- UNIT 4: Day-to-day how to run a family.

# Diving in 

## Today's Questions

1. Why require college students to take a course on the family?
2. What is going well with our families, and what could be better?
3. What's more important: presonal atonomy or societal obligations?

### My thoughts

1. 
2. 
3. I think you are only obligated to give back to society as much as it has given you.

## History of BYU Religion Hours

<!-- When Griffiths went to BYU, the required religion courses were such: BoM 1st half, BoM 2nd half, either  -->

> Griffiths glazed Joe Spencer for a REL 275 (Teaching s& Doctrines of the BoM) professor. ("Blows your brain".)

From this class, you'll learn how you are part of *the* eternal family.


## Question 1: Why require a course on the family?

- The second commandment ever given was to Adam & Eve: "Multiply and replenish the earth."
    - In a talk, Pres Oaks said between this commandment and the other one given ("don't partake of the fruit"), Adam & Eve chose the more important one.
- Griffiths said: 90% of your happiness (made-up statistic) doesn't come from your career. It comes from your relationships. In addition to the Family Proclamation, this course discusses how to have good familial relationships.
- Every family is different, and you need to know the *principles* that found a good family.
- Learning to become like God is the purpose of our lives. And what title does God go by? Father. So learning how to become (Heavenly) Fathers/Mothers.
- This course's topics intersects with a lot of political hot topics. People (on both sides of the political spectrum) get upset w/ the church for their policies in these areas. 

## THE Eternal Family


The name of this class "Eternal Families." It is "*The* Eternal Family". Every single person is included in THE Eternal Family.  

We are all here because a man and woman loved each other and created an eternal family. We are all intrinsically children to a Heavenly Father and Mother; our live's goal is to become children of Christ.


D&C 84:33-35. This chapter does NOT talk about gender (despite the fact that it is oft associated w/ the Order of the Priesthood (whatever tf that is)).

### Church Demographic

Acc to Elder Gong, we have more single people than married people in the church.

"Our standing before the Lord and in His church...We seek daily to follow Jesus Christ with faith unto repentance and enduring joy." - Elder Gong, "Room in the Inn", Apr. 2021.

## Why does the Proclamation to the Family exist?

When Hinckley became prophet of the church, he was asked what his greatest concern was. His response was the family (1995).

After the recent death of Holland, Dallin H. Oaks is the only author of the Proclamation still alive.

Proclamation was presented in the women's section of General Conf. When he introduced it, he emphasized that it was a reaffirmation of standards that have been repeatedly stated throughout the church's history. But there were some new things: Gender being tied to your eternal entity was introduced/solidified w/ the Proclamation.

## Question: Individual Autonomy or Societal Obligation?



